---
layout: post_default
title:  "To mentor"
date:   2017-01-03 3:27:00 +4:00:00
categories: ["zulip", "outreachy", "gci", "blog"]
author: "alicja"
published: true
---
When I first heard Zulip is taking part in Google Code-In and was asked to
become a mentor, I got excited. And scared. The more time passed, the more
scared I was, feeling inadequate and not experienced enough to review other
people's code.

After the first week of GCI I was terrified. It felt like the reviews were
a never-ending battle between the quality and quantity (GCI students are motivated to do as many tasks as possible due to the contest rules). I've
constantly been asked questions I didn't know the answers to and was
expected to understand features from a large chunk of the codebase - larger
than I felt comfortable with.

I felt like I was only disturbing the learning process and irritating the
students with my constant questions and nagging for improvements. I was
learning a lot to my own benefit:

- After explaining git flow many times, I finally feel confident while working in the terminal and not just pretending to be comfortable with it.

- I've learned to rebase, amend and merge other's work into the
    codebase.

- I've created a group of tasks on interactive bots and learned more
    from students asking questions about them than from creating my own bot.

- I've had a comprehensible conversation in German with one of the
    students, which is a big deal for me since I haven't used the language
    in years.

Gradually, I became more and more confident with code reviews and helping
out on chat. I've read a bunch of articles on multiple topics concerning
Python, APIs, webhooks, frontend testing and typing. I've learned a ton
from reading other mentors' reviews of the contributions. I'm now able to
calmly read a question and not panic when I initially don't know the
answer, even though I'm *supposed to*.

Being in this double role of a mentee and a mentor, I think I benefited
much more from GCI than I thought possible. Also, Zulip is rapidly being
improved by many motivated students - hundreds of mypy annotations were
added, multiple features were fixed, many interactive bots were introduced, and a ton of user documentation was written. I did not expect for it to go
this well.

Over the past few weeks I've also had a lot of thoughts on improving the
process and communication, even going as far as to have [pull request](https://github.com/zulip/zulip-gci/pull/394) for that.

### What's important to the mentor

* Give context.

    When asking for help or a review, give the mentor some context on the
    issue. They are working on multiple issues and helping many people -
    they might not immediately remember all the relevant facts. Show what
    you have already done to solve the problem.

* Think about the user.

    When developing a feature, think about the user perspective whenever
    applicable. What are the expected use cases? What would be comfortable
    to use, not just simple and reasonable to implement?

* Respect others' time.

    Before submitting anything, make sure you took care of any sloppiness
    (typos, linter errors, unnecessary chunks of code). Test your feature
    manually. Make sure you are asking for help for something you weren't able to solve, not something you forgot to check.

* Don't expect simple answers.

    When asking questions, expect help, but be prepared to accept it in
    the form it's been offered. If a mentor is pointing you to an external
    resource or asking you to double check your implementation, they're
    doing it to help you learn.

* Don't be embarrassed.

    Sometimes you might think asking a question will make you look  
    inadequate. Don't let this keep you stuck. If you've tried and failed,
    there is nothing to be ashamed of.

* Strive for self-guidance.

    Have ownership of your work - both the solutions and the problems. Be
    proud of your achievements, however small. You are learning here and the best way to learn is to take responsibility.

* Stay positive.

    I'm sure you can do it - so you should be too. Don't discourage yourself
    and lessen your skills. You are here to learn and I'm here to help you,
    there is nothing wrong with making mistakes on the way. Just be sure to
    understand and learn from them.
